Zentangle

What Is It?
The Zentangle Method is an easy-to-learn, relaxing, and fun way to create beautiful images by drawing structured patterns. We call these patterns, tangles. You create tangles with combinations of dots, lines, simple curves, S-curves and orbs. These simple shapes are the "Elemental Strokes" in all Zentangle art. These patterns are drawn on small pieces of paper called "tiles." We call them tiles because you can assemble them into mosaics.

Zentangle art is non-representational and unplanned so you can focus on each stroke and not worry about the result. There is no up or down to Zentangle art. If fact, you can most easily create Zentangle art by rotating your tile as you tangle -- always keeping your hand in a relaxed position. You don't need to know what a tangle is going to look like to draw it. You just need to know the steps. The result is a delightful surprise.

As you use the Zentangle Method to create beautiful images, you likely will enjoy increased focus, creativity, self-confidence and an increased sense well-being.

As a kid, school student, I loved sketching, I believed I would live a life of an artist. I would draw in my mind all the time, but my favourite place was on my eating plate; yes funny it is, but for several minutes while chewing I loved the way I moved the gravy with fingers. But even before I grew 13, I lost my confidence, I lost the belief on the artistic approach . Today, after 17 long years of gap, with absolutely no drawing or sketching, I am once again living my artistic dream fully, daily, tangling on all the tiles. Such is the energy, the flow of tangling, that I end up thanking each pen and paper I come across. Thanks to Zentangle Method.
– Aishwarya Bharadwaj Darbha

We believe that life is an art form and that each person is an artist. The Zentangle Method is an elegant metaphor and model for inspiring a deliberate artistry in life.

For this reason, we deliberately do not include an eraser in our Zentangle Kit or use it as part of a Zentangle practice. We have no eraser in life, so why in a Zentangle Kit? There's little use for it when you think about it. Pencil strings and borders can be ignored and pen marks can't be erased. Even if those pen marks aren't initially what you might have intended (we never call them "mistakes" in the Zentangle Method), you can use them as inspirations to go in directions that you may not have otherwise explored. Instead of looking at them as mistakes, we reframe them as "opportunities."

By avoiding common blocks to creative flow such as: self-criticism, fear of failure, lack of immediate positive feedback, worrying about outcomes, frustration with lengthy training, lack of inspiration and doubts about what to do next, you can create beautiful art right away.

The Zentangle Method's "elegance of limits" paradoxically inspires creativity with its gentle boundaries and structured patterns. These so-called limits enhance creativity and support a greater freedom of expression.

People of all ages, skills and interests enjoy the Zentangle Method all over this world. Together, they form a world-wide community of passionate and grateful artists, full of friendships, support, sharing and learning. Zentangle art provides common meeting ground because it is independent of language, age, political views, religious beliefs or any other category that separates one from another.

Zentangle was the key to the door I thought would never open for me. I longed to be able to create art, and did so in several mediums (jewelry, décor, fabric) but never on paper. My mother said she cannot draw, and I grew up believing that I could not, either. I was even "scared" to try Zentangle. I would buy the books, but I was convinced that I would not be able to follow the instructions and I would again feel like a failure. I waited and waited until I could take a Zentangle class. Love and creativity BLOOMED!! I have such a feeling of confidence and excitement and I eagerly share it with whomever I meet. I LOVE, LOVE, LOVE the Zentangle method and the person I have become. I am forever appreciative.
– Jamie Herron

The Zentangle approach encourages self-respect and respect for your creativity by using the best materials available. These need not mean the most expensive. If you were creating Zentangle art on the beach at low tide, you would still choose the best stick you could find and the smoothest area on which to tangle.

Even though our name, Zentangle, has “zen” in it, we do not teach Zen Buddhism or any religion. We teach how to create beautiful art with gratitude and appreciation.

People who draw according to the Zentangle Method, describe their experiences as others describe the states of mindfulness and flow. This can occur as soon as with the first tile. No longer is a lengthy practice needed to access these inspiring and high performance states of awareness.

Tangling has set my creativity free! With no preconceived idea of exactly how a piece will finish up, that allows my creativity to flow in ways that any other artwork doesn't release for me! I enjoy being "in the zone" when I'm tangling. It's like a mini vacation for me, taking me away from any cares or concerns of my day! Thank you Rick and Maria for all your wonderful inspiration and encouragement!
– Linda J F

We expected a Zentangle practice to have a positive influence on creativity, self-image, focus and problem solving. We don't yet have completed scientific studies to explain why this works. But we have thousands of anecdotes showing that it does work. We did not anticipate these benefits when we developed the Zentangle Method. General areas that a Zentangle practice benefits include:

Phobias
Addictions
Pain management 
Conflict resolution
Workplace burnout
We continue to discover more benefits to a Zentangle practice, both for individuals and for groups.

I always had told people that I wasn't creative. I could do what others told or showed me to do and loved crafts for that reason. Not until I discovered Zentangle did I realize that I WAS creative, and that I WAS an artist. It has totally changed my life - I now have a positive self-image, and don't worry about making mistakes. I am thrilled to be able to pay it forward by teaching the Zentangle process to others!
– Lynn Noga


How Does It Work?
The Zentangle Method works because

It is fun
It is simple to learn
Each stroke is easy to draw
There are no mistakes
There are no preplanned outcomes, yet
You always know what to do next
The result is unexpected and beautiful . . .
. . . and all this occurs with gratitude and appreciation.

When you create with the Zentangle Method, you also discover new skills and abilities as you create your beautiful and unexpected results.

How does all that happen?

One reason is almost every person discovers they can create something unexpected and beautiful in about 15 minutes or so. That feels good, particularly for people who believed they couldn't draw.

Another reason is it enables you to deliberately access a state of relaxed focus, wake up your imagination and express it creatively with confidence. According to many anecdotes, the physical, mental and emotional benefits of this are significant. 

I was lacking something and then I found Zentangle. My empty spot has been filled. My confidence to create art and, well, do anything I put my mind to, has increased tremendously thanks to Zentangle. 
– Terri

We can (and often do) go on and on to describe how the Zentangle Method works, but you will really understand how the Zentangle Method works for you when you put pen to paper according to the Zentangle Method.

The best ways to begin are to:

Take a class with a Certified Zentangle Teacher (CZT)
Purchase one of our Zentangle Kits,
Read our books, and
Explore this website.
The Zentangle Method works because it is simple, fun and effective and it helps you get out of your own way.

You focus on each immediate stroke without worrying about what to do next or what the end result will be.

You discover you know what to do when the time comes to do it.

The method's "elegance of limits" enhances your creativity, and expressing it feels good.

I am profoundly grateful for finding the Zentangle Method. It brought me back art that I thought had been all but lost. I had been a commercial artist and jewelry designer for many years, when I was stopped on my tracks by stage 4 cancer. During the treatment years, I thought it was all lost, I could not create anything for work, let alone for pleasure. Then I found Zentangle, and it brought back art in the most unexpected way, in a calm, soothing, meditative way, not the high strung way it had been before while working for clients. Thank you SO much for bringing that joy to me.
– Eni Oken

How Did It Start?
Once upon a time, Rick and Maria sold prints of Maria’s botanical illustrations at art fairs. Maria would inscribe each botanical she sold as the customer watched. As customers watched her beautiful lettering appear on the page they became emotional and exclaimed how they wished they could do what she did. Then, without missing a beat, they gave all the reasons why they couldn't . . . not enough time, talent, space, money, etc. But Rick and Maria were struck by their deep yearning to experience their own creative fulfillment.

Sometime later, on a quiet Saturday afternoon in the fall of 2003, Rick interrupted Maria in her studio as she added patterns to the background of a large, gilded letter.

Rick’s sudden interruption caused her to notice what she was experiencing just before he interrupted her. Maria described feelings of selflessness, timelessness, effortlessness, and a rich immersion in what she was doing – all classic aspects of a flow state. Rick, who had practiced meditation for many years, said, “You’re describing meditation.”

As Rick and Maria discussed what had just happened, they noted that the beautiful patterns behind the gold-leafed letter were simple to draw, unlike the precise letter forms. Then they remembered all those people who yearned to be creative yet could not invest the time necessary to become an accomplished lettering artist. Maybe they would enjoy learning how to draw these patterns.

And so began the idea that grew to become the Zentangle Method of drawing. By some good fortune, we realized the importance of the idea. To capture it in its fresh fullness, we bought a blank book and booked a B&B in western Massachusetts for a couple days. All the way there and back, and all the time we were there, we recorded our conversations in that book. It felt like we were taking dictation. Everything we wrote became the Zentangle Method as we now teach it.

On the last night of our stay, after trying on many names, we still hadn’t found one that fit. Although we did like the word “tangle” to describe our new method of drawing patterns.

As we played with words that rhymed with "tangle", one of us said “Zentangle.” It was like finally putting on a shoe that fits after trying on many ill-fitting ones. All at once, we both exclaimed, “That’s It!”

We did an online search for “Zentangle.” No one was using it. “Zentangle” it would be! We reserved zentangle.com and began the process to register our name.

(Rick meditated for years, although contrary to reports, he never practiced Zen or Zen Buddhism. But we do have fun saying, “He’s Zen and she’s tangle.” And if you’ve met us, you know why! :-)

Interesting side note: When Maria and Rick first began "dating" one of their primary topics of conversation was geometry, specifically sacred geometry or the topic of Fibonacci proportions and patterns. Maria was using them in her art and design work and Rick was using them in analyzing the price movements of companies and commodities. This was a forecast of the aspect of Zentangle art which mirrors the geometric and fractal nature of the patterns found throughout creation.



